GH-91048: Add utils for capturing async call stack for asyncio programs and enable profiling (#124640)
python/cpython: Doc/library/asyncio-graph.rst

.. currentmodule:: asyncio

.. _asyncio-graph:

===================
Stack Introspection
===================

**Source code:** :source:`Lib/asyncio/graph.py`

-------------------------------------

asyncio has powerful runtime call graph introspection utilities
to trace the entire call graph of a running coroutine or task, or
a suspended *future*.  These utilities and the underlying machinery
can be used by users in their Python code or by external profilers
and debuggers.

> .. versionadded:: 3.14

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. versionadded:: next
```

Author: Why? It will be part of 3.14. Dismissing this comment.

Reviewer: It's for the next release version not for 3.15. That's a new sphinx extension that we use. IOW it will render (3.14.0a2, unreleased) instead of 3.14. When we release the final 3.14, it will be changed to 3.14 so that users know exactly when this is available. (docs are rendered continuously so people reading it will think it's available *now*)

Author: wow, that's great. Applying.

> .. function:: print_call_graph(*, future=None, file=None, depth=1)

Reviewer 2: Would you consider slightly different signature: `print_call_graph(future_or_task=None, /, *, file=None, depth=1)`?

In my mind, keyword-only parameters are great for passing *options* into the called function.
The first parameter obviously is special, it is the object to print information for (or the current task if omitted).

Proposed `future_or_task` name could help beginners to learn the API; newbies rarely aware about asyncio *low-level futures* but work with asyncio *tasks* only.  

The same principle could be applied to other introspection functions as well.

Author: Yeah, good idea, +1. @ambv wanna do it?

Reviewer 3: done, I am sticking with "future" name because that's what is used in "FutureCallGraph"

   Print the async call graph for the current task or the provided
   :class:`Task` or :class:`Future`.

   The function receives an optional keyword-only *future* argument.
   If not passed, the current running task will be used. If there's no
   current task, the function returns ``None``.

   If the function is called on *the current task*, the optional
   keyword-only *depth* argument can be used to skip the specified
   number of frames from top of the stack.

>    If *file* is not specified the function will print to :data:`sys.stdout`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If *file* is omitted or ``None``, the output goes to
   :data:`sys.stderr`; otherwise it should be an open
   :term:`file <file object>` or :term:`file-like object` to
   receive the output.
```
The proposed text if borrowed from docs for `traceback.print_tb()`.

   **Example:**

   The following Python code:

   .. code-block:: python

      import asyncio

      async def test():
         asyncio.print_call_graph()

      async def main():
         async with asyncio.TaskGroup() as g:

>             g.create_task(test())

Reviewer: To ease C/C, can you use 4-spaces indent here? (you still need a 3 space indent to align with `.. code-block`).

Author: Absolutely, no idea how I ended up putting 3 spaces there :) Fixing.

      asyncio.run(main())

   will print::

      * Task(name='Task-2', id=0x1039f0fe0)
      + Call stack:
      |   File 't2.py', line 4, in async test()
      + Awaited by:
         * Task(name='Task-1', id=0x103a5e060)
            + Call stack:
            |   File 'taskgroups.py', line 107, in async TaskGroup.__aexit__()
            |   File 't2.py', line 7, in async main()

.. function:: format_call_graph(*, future=None, depth=1)

   Like :func:`print_call_graph`, but returns a string.

.. function:: capture_call_graph(*, future=None)

   Capture the async call graph for the current task or the provided
   :class:`Task` or :class:`Future`.

   The function receives an optional keyword-only *future* argument.
   If not passed, the current running task will be used. If there's no
   current task, the function returns ``None``.

   If the function is called on *the current task*, the optional

>    keyword-only ``depth`` argument can be used to skip the specified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   keyword-only *depth* argument can be used to skip the specified
```

Author: Fixed

   number of frames from top of the stack.

   Returns a ``FutureCallGraph`` data class object:

   * ``FutureCallGraph(future, call_stack, awaited_by)``

>       Where 'future' is a reference to a *Future* or a *Task*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Where *future* is a reference to a :class:`!Future` or a :class:`!Task`
```

Author: done

      (or their subclasses.)

      ``call_stack`` is a list of ``FrameCallGraphEntry`` objects.

      ``awaited_by`` is a list of ``FutureCallGraph`` objects.

   * ``FrameCallGraphEntry(frame)``

>       Where ``frame`` is a frame object of a regular Python function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Where *frame* is a frame object of a regular Python function
```

Author: Fixed

      in the call stack.

Low level utility functions
===========================

To introspect an async call graph asyncio requires cooperation from
control flow structures, such as :func:`shield` or :class:`TaskGroup`.

> Any time an intermediate ``Future`` object with low-level APIs like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any time an intermediate :class:`Future` object with low-level APIs like
```

Author: fixed

:meth:`Future.add_done_callback() <asyncio.Future.add_done_callback>` is
involved, the following two functions should be used to inform *asyncio*
about how exactly such intermediate future objects are connected with
the tasks they wrap or control.

.. function:: future_add_to_awaited_by(future, waiter, /)

   Record that *future* is awaited on by *waiter*.

   Both *future* and *waiter* must be instances of

>    :class:`asyncio.Future <Future>` or :class:`asyncio.Task <Task>` or

Reviewer: Do you want "Future" or "asyncio.Future" to be rendered here?

Author: The former, fixed.

   their subclasses, otherwise the call would have no effect.

   A call to ``future_add_to_awaited_by()`` must be followed by an

>    eventual call to the ``future_discard_from_awaited_by()`` function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   eventual call to the :func:`future_discard_from_awaited_by` function
```

Author: fixed

   with the same arguments.

.. function:: future_discard_from_awaited_by(future, waiter, /)

   Record that *future* is no longer awaited on by *waiter*.

   Both *future* and *waiter* must be instances of

>    :class:`asyncio.Future <Future>` or :class:`asyncio.Task <Task>` or

Reviewer: Ditto.

Author: fixed

.. currentmodule:: asyncio

.. _asyncio-graph:

========================
Call Graph Introspection
========================

**Source code:** :source:`Lib/asyncio/graph.py`

-------------------------------------

asyncio has powerful runtime call graph introspection utilities
to trace the entire call graph of a running *coroutine* or *task*, or
a suspended *future*.  These utilities and the underlying machinery
can be used from within a Python program or by external profilers
and debuggers.

.. versionadded:: next

.. function:: print_call_graph(future=None, /, *, file=None, depth=1, limit=None)

   Print the async call graph for the current task or the provided
   :class:`Task` or :class:`Future`.

>    This function prints entries starting from the top frame and going

Reviewer 4: this sentence is incomplete

Reviewer 5: oops, good catch.

.. currentmodule:: asyncio

.. _asyncio-graph:

========================
Call Graph Introspection
========================

**Source code:** :source:`Lib/asyncio/graph.py`

-------------------------------------

asyncio has powerful runtime call graph introspection utilities
to trace the entire call graph of a running *coroutine* or *task*, or

> a suspended *future*.  These utilities and the underlying machinery

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
a suspended *future*. These utilities and the underlying machinery
```
😅

> can be used by users in their Python code or by external profilers

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
can be used from within a Python program or by external profilers
```

and debuggers.

.. versionadded:: next

.. function:: print_call_graph(future=None, /, *, file=None, depth=1, limit=None)

   Print the async call graph for the current task or the provided
   :class:`Task` or :class:`Future`.

   This function prints entries starting from the currently executing frame,

>    i.e. the top frame, and going down towards the invocation point.

Reviewer 4: If `future` is not `None`, then the top frame may be suspended (so it's not the `currently executing` frame). Right?

Author: Yeah, correct, this is meant to say "currently executing frame from the point where the call stack capturing API was called".

Reviewer 5: This is meant to say the top frame of either `future` or the current running task. The point I was making when writing this was that the order is reversed from what you'd typically expect in Python tracebacks.

   The function receives an optional *future* argument.

>    If not passed, the current running task will be used.

Reviewer 4: This paragraph repeats what you say in lines 28-9.

   The function receives an optional *future* argument.
   If not passed, the current running task will be used. If there's no
   current task, the function returns ``None``.

   If the function is called on *the current task*, the optional
   keyword-only *depth* argument can be used to skip the specified
   number of frames from top of the stack.

   Returns a ``FutureCallGraph`` data class object:

   * ``FutureCallGraph(future, call_stack, awaited_by)``

      Where *future* is a reference to a :class:`Future` or
      a :class:`Task` (or their subclasses.)

      ``call_stack`` is a tuple of ``FrameCallGraphEntry`` objects.

      ``awaited_by`` is a tuple of ``FutureCallGraph`` objects.

   * ``FrameCallGraphEntry(frame)``

      Where *frame* is a frame object of a regular Python function
      in the call stack.

Low level utility functions
===========================

To introspect an async call graph asyncio requires cooperation from
control flow structures, such as :func:`shield` or :class:`TaskGroup`.
Any time an intermediate :class:`Future` object with low-level APIs like
:meth:`Future.add_done_callback() <asyncio.Future.add_done_callback>` is

> involved, the following two functions should be used to inform *asyncio*

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
involved, the following two functions should be used to inform asyncio
```
Is there meant to be this emphasis on `asyncio` here? We haven't emphasized it elsewhere and I'm just curious on the reasoning for myself :)

Author: Yeah, I’m not sure why it’s emphasized. Let’s not. Good catch!
